[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the most researched
areas in EFT, tapping,
has been in the area
of food cravings.
So we have run a lot of
that here in Australia.
What it has shown us is
that you can apply things
like tapping to food cravings,
to any type of thing that
actually probably gives you
some sort of addictive response.
So whilst today we'll have
a look at food cravings,
you could actually use
this technique for anything
that perhaps you
find hard to resist.
So that could be
alcohol included.
It could even be cigarettes.
We have also done a cigarette
smoking trial here in Australia
as well.
So all of these are published,
and everybody can actually
get access to them and read
what came out of those results.
But of course, I can tell
you that all of them work.
Today, we'll have a
look at a food craving,
but you can imagine
applying this to anything
that perhaps you find hard
to resist, like I said.
So if it is perhaps that
wine at the end of the day,
or perhaps taking the
Panadol, that type of thing,
you could do anything.
If you found that perhaps you
worked a little bit too much,
that maybe some people kind
of called you a workaholic,
we could put that
in the category
as well because anything that's
sort of obsessive or drives us
and we feel like we don't have
much intervention in that,
or we find it really hard
to pull back, of course,
you could try tapping with that.
So today, let me talk to you
about how to actually apply
to a standard food craving.
Most of the time we
ask people to have
the food in front of them.
So if for whatever reason you
did want to do this in action
today, absolutely go and
get whatever the food is.
Now, that could be
a drink as well,
and sometimes people might
choose something like alcohol.
If you did want to do
that type of thing,
we would always recommend do
the video at the time of day
that you would typically
have the strongest response.
So if for whatever reason, it
was first thing in the morning
and you did want to actually
tap on a glass of wine,
but that's not a time that
you typically drink it,
we would say delay the
video until that 5:00
when the cheese and biscuits
come out and perhaps
the wine as well.
It's always best at
that exact time of day
that perhaps that
craving is strongest.
So let me show you
how to use this today.
We have a packet of chocolate
biscuits with us here today.
And like I said,
it is really good
to have the food
in front of you.
What it does is allows us to
sort of go into an exposure
mode where we can really pay
attention to what's happening.
Now, sometimes for some people,
packaging is really important.
And so the sight of
packaging on a food
is the very first
thing that they
become aware of that
gives them a response.
If that was the reason and
that actually happened for you,
the very first
thing I would say is
tap on what the
packaging does to you.
So sometimes a bag of crisps,
unopened, but just the sight
of it starts someone's
mouth salivating.
We call all those
things aspects.
So any kind of emotion
or body sensation
or feeling or a thought is an
aspect that makes something up.
And particularly, in a food
craving we have a lot of them.
So there's often the sight
of it, the smell of it,
the taste of it, the feeling
in my body, in my mouth,
and we one by one systematically
work through those.
So the first thing to
do then is to actually
have the food in front of you.
So if I take one of
these chocolate biscuits
out and have it
with me here, what
I'm looking for
with a food craving
are obviously all the things
I really love about it.
So it is a little bit
different when we do
tapping on this type of thing.
But if you think
about it, we're still
being really honest about
exactly what's going on for us.
It's just with a
food craving, you
tend to be really in
love with the food.
And what we're trying to do
is take that 10 out of 10
desire level down to a 0.
So it is different
in terms of we're
tapping on what
we love about it.
But at the same time, it's still
true to the tapping process
where we're being 100% honest
with exactly what's going on
for us.
Now, there's lots of
aspects, like I mentioned,
with things that we tap on.
And particularly
with food cravings,
think of them as
characteristics.
Sometimes it'll be
about the smell.
So if we were to smell our food
craving-- and in this instance,
obviously, I could
smell what that
smells like-- what
I would be looking
for the descriptions,
the characteristics that
really stand out to
me, that appeal to me.
And that's what I'm going
to tap on to start with.
After we do smell,
we'll move onto taste.
So it is always really
good to actually smell
what it is first.
And if it's a cup
of steaming coffee
and that's what you
want to do, it'll
still be about the
smell to start with.
So if I was to smell this right
now, what's standing out to me
is sweet.
So that's a word that just
comes to mind, and chocolatey.
The smell to me is chocolatey.
So the smell then I
would rate out of 10.
So how strong is it for me?
And the chocolate
smell is quite strong
because if my smell
aspect is high,
my desire is going to be high
to want to eat it as well.
So the smell here is probably
a 9 out of 10 for me.
So chocolatey and sweet,
they're the things
that are standing out.
At the moment, I can't
smell anything else,
but let's start with those.
So if you have your
own food that you're
working with at home, just go on
the main smell characteristics
to start with.
So let me put that down and
start with our side of the hand
point.
So even though this biscuit
smells so chocolatey and sweet,
I accept this is how I feel.
Even though this smells
so chocolatey and sweet,
it's a 9 out of 10, I
accept I feel this way.
Even though this chocolate
smell is sweet, it's so strong,
I accept I feel this way.
And up to the start
of the eyebrow
here, this chocolate
smell, the side of the eye,
it's really strong.
Under the eye, this
chocolate smell,
under the nose,
this sweet smell,
on the chin, this
chocolate smell,
collarbone,
chocolatey sweetness.
Under the arm, this chocolate
smell, and top of the head,
this smell inside the Oreo.
Now take a deep breath.
And our aim here
is to keep checking
with the food, which is what's
really handy if you have it
in front of you.
Is to then, as we guess
that number out of 10,
actually give it a
smell and see what might
be happening at this point.
Is there anything that's
sort of standing out to me?
Is there anything different?
Sometimes people will smell
something slightly different.
The sweet smell for me
has actually diminished
or dropped off.
The only thing I am left with is
some sort of chocolatey scent,
but the sweetness to me
has actually shifted.
So what I might do is one
more round on the smell
and then move into taste.
So if I guessed a
number at the moment,
it's probably about a 6.
So I'll come back to my
eyebrow point, and I'll say,
the chocolate smell
is standing out.
Side of the eye, this
chocolate smell, under the eye,
the chocolate Oreo.
Under the nose, this
chocolate smell, chin point,
it's pretty strong still.
Collarbone, chocolate
smell, under the arm,
this chocolate Oreo,
top of the head,
this chocolate Oreo smell.
Taking a deep breath at
this point, and, of course,
checking in with the food
that you're working with.
So to smell now, I can still
smell the chocolate smell.
But what's happening
for me at this moment
is anything enticing about
it isn't sort of there
at the moment.
So sometimes smell
will elicit salivation.
And what people might
find is after a few rounds
of tapping, I can
still smell it but it's
almost distant from
them, so it's not
creating any physiological
response, which seems to be
happening for me at the moment.
So check yours.
If you need to do
a few more rounds,
if smell is quite a strong
aspect, then maybe a few more
rounds on that before you move
to the next stage is useful.
The next point, though, is if
smell has disappeared a bit,
it's changed, maybe
sometimes foods
start to smell a
bit more chemical.
People start to recognize
different scents in there.
It's not as appealing as well--
is to actually try and
taste it, so to actually
have a bite because sometimes
the action of eating something
and the sensations in the mouth
and then the feelings that
go with it are different
to what smell did.
So the point here is to
have a bite of whatever food
that you're eating and
tell me what happens.
So here I go.
What am I aware of?
Now, the first thing that
stood out to me was crunch.
So crunch for
something like this
was something that was
quite a satisfying feeling.
It dissolved pretty
quickly after that for me
and then almost became a bit
of a creaminess in there.
So that is my next two
things that I'm going
to look at as characteristics.
So working through,
kind of going,
the crunch was
satisfying, and then there
was a creaminess that sort
of came in afterwards.
So back to side of the
hand, brand new aspect.
Even though this Oreo is
crunchy and then it's creamy,
I accept this is how I feel.
Even though this Oreo is crunchy
and creamy, quite satisfying
in my mouth, I
accept how I feel.
Even though this Oreo is creamy
and crunchy and satisfying,
I accept how I feel.
Up to your eyebrow,
crunchy feeling,
side of the eye, in my
mouth, under the eye,
this crunchy feeling, under
the nose, creamy and crunchy.
On the chin, this
creamy, crunchy Oreo.
Collarbone, this creamy,
crunchy chocolate.
Under the arm, this
chocolatey, creamy, crunchy.
Top of the head, this
crunchy Oreo, so satisfying.
Take a deep breath.
Now, it appears as
I was saying all
these wonderful positive
words at this point.
But what it's really
about is being honest.
Tapping is all about
the truth, what
is happening for you right now.
That's all it is about.
That's all you need to remember.
So at the moment, my next step
is to actually have a bite,
and actually not feeling very
into my Oreo at the moment.
It's funny, like the smell
is disappearing a little bit.
I almost have to put
it closer to my nose
to get it to have a smell.
So if I go with it and
try and have another bite,
I'll see how my crunchy
creamy is going.
OK, so there's no
creamy anymore.
So even though there
is a filling in it,
the initial bite sort of
dissolved into a creamy for me.
That's sort of not there.
It's a bit gritty now.
So what I'm becoming aware of
is something different in there.
It's actually tasting to
me a little bit sweet.
So after a couple of
rounds of tapping,
I haven't tapped on
sweetness, but it's
starting to kind of have
that effect now where
it's not pleasant, which
is where I want to go.
I want to get to the
point where I'm like,
I don't actually want
to eat this anymore.
So let's do another round
of tapping just so that we
can get this to shift again.
So back to our eyebrow point,
the crunchiness is still there.
Side of the eye,
creaminess is gone.
Under the eye, crunchiness
is still there.
Under the nose,
creaminess is gone.
Chin point, it's
a bit too sweet.
Collarbone, the
crunchiness is a bit sweet.
Under the arm, this
crunchy sweetness.
Top of the head, I
can still taste it.
It's a bit sweet now.
Take a deep breath
and let that go.
Of course, we get to
a point sometimes when
we're doing food cravings
but we don't actually
feel like we want to
have another taste of it.
So if you do find
you get to that point
where it's not enticing you
enough, that's perfectly OK.
That is where we want to get to.
So if I was to give it a rating
out of 10 as to my desire level
to want to eat this at the
moment, it's about a 1.
So whilst there is
nothing to stop me,
no free choice has
been taken away here,
the desire, if I'm honest
with myself, is not there.
It's like you could take it or
leave it, that type of thing.
And that is where the
ultimate power comes from when
we do tapping with food issues.
So if something doesn't
have power over you anymore,
then, of course, it
doesn't bother you,
and you're free to walk
away or have choice and only
have it once a month, or however
frequent you would like it.
So I don't want to
taste it at the moment.
I have reached that
point where I'm like,
I don't actually want
to eat it anymore.
I almost have to put it up
my nose to get the smell now.
Something has shifted
there with it.
So there isn't anything in me
that wants to actually continue
with that, which is good.
If for whatever
reason there was,
you would continue working
through the different
characteristics or the aspects.
Now, I didn't really talk
about any feeling or sensation
in my mouth or my body.
Sometimes foods do give us
that relaxation feeling.
And of course, if that was
prominent with whatever food
you're working on, absolutely
tap on that feeling.
The other thing
that we do know can
happen with food
in particular is,
as you're tapping away
on all these nice little
characteristics and getting
them down in their number,
is you may well become
aware of a memory.
You may well have something
that comes into your mind,
and that is that memory
center letting you
know that perhaps there's
something else linked to this.
We do know that anything
like a food craving--
alcohol, medications,
illegal drugs--
if any of them are used as
a self-soothing in order
to make another feeling
go away, then there
may well be origins back in
earlier years, even childhood,
that need to be addressed and
tapping can be used for that.
So keep that in the
back of your mind,
that if you did become
aware of anything
that seemed to just
pop into your mind
as a past event or a memory,
that that is something
you can explore with tapping
and perhaps even with somebody
that's highly skilled.
Now, there's one more
step that we always
do with the food cravings.
Some of our original
research looked
at food diaries of
everybody in our trial,
so we were actually
asking them daily
to fill out what foods
they were eating,
was it a craving, was it
for a different reason.
And then we coded
all of the reasons
that they actually
were eating everything
in their lives, which was
fantastic to actually look
at as really rich data.
But what it showed us was there
were only three main reasons
people would eat a food,
any food, in their lives.
It was mainly women that
filled out our food diaries
for this particular-- and most
of them were in the age group
50 to 65 years of age, so they
were the women in our trials.
And the number one reason that
they were eating was wastage.
What that meant was they
were eating the food
to not waste it.
We also realized that at this
point, that age generation
of women in our trials--
and we've since replicated
it with other trials--
have come out of having
mothers and grandmothers that
were in the Depression in the
1920s and the Second World War,
where food and scarcity
was a real issue.
But those messages
have been passed down
through generations.
And even in a world now that is
abundant with food and choice,
the messages in a lot of women
in our trials in particular
have been around,
I can't waste food.
So here's what happens.
We get to the point
where somebody
has an Oreo, a
bucket of ice cream,
a chocolate,
whatever it might be,
and they sit there
and tell us, I
don't have any desire
for this anymore.
We then ask them, OK, so
you don't want to eat it.
It is junk food.
That's what we all tap on.
Can you throw it in the bin?
And most of the people
will say [GASP],,
and they want to then kill
us for suggesting the idea.
And we've introduced this idea
into all food craving tapping,
but there's a second layer.
If you quite freely
can go, yeah, well,
I don't really want
to eat any of these,
and I actually can throw
the whole packet in the bin
because it's junk
anyway, if you're
OK to do that, fantastic.
The best test is to walk to the
bin, the rubbish bin, slowly
with your food, and see what
feelings come up as you walk.
If at any point during that
process of walking to the bin
to throw out a complete packet
of biscuits anything comes up--
a thought about it's
bad choice food, ,
a feeling the most
common one is guilt,
I feel guilty throwing it
out, any belief or thought,
I could give this
to somebody else.
There are starving
children in Africa.
I could send it to them.
Anything that might come out of
families or anything like that,
stop and don't
throw the food out.
Come back and do
some tapping on that.
So that's the best test is
to walk slowly to the bin
with your food to see whether
you can discard it but feel OK.
At no point do we want
people to not feel OK.
What we want you to
do is do tapping.
Now, tapping at this angle
might be just on I feel guilty.
That's a feeling.
It might be on something else.
There could be messages
there from the family.
It could be that
this does relate
to what you've been taught, and
you can use that in your words.
So let's, for the sake of
just doing this and seeing
it roll out, do one or two
rounds on the whole idea
about food wastage is bad so
that we can actually move this.
What we've found is
somebody could have no food
craving for the
Oreo but override
that to avoid the guilt
feeling with wasting food.
So they'll actually
override no desire in order
not to throw it out.
So let's start with
our setup statement.
Even I can't possibly
throw this food out--
that would be wasting
it, I would feel so bad--
I accept how I feel.
Even though I can't
possibly throw this out,
I feel too guilty.
I learnt this message.
I accept this is how I feel.
Even though I can't
possibly throw this out,
it makes me feel too bad.
Someone else could have it.
This is the message
I was taught.
I accept this is how I feel.
Up to the eyebrow
point, I feel bad.
Side of the eye, I feel
bad throwing this food out.
Under the eye, someone
taught me this.
Under the nose, I
don't want to feel bad.
On the chin, it would
be better to eat it.
Collarbone, I feel guilty.
Under the arm, other
people are going without.
Top of the head, I
don't want to waste it.
I feel bad.
Take a deep breath and just see
what is coming to mind for you.
It might be about
those family sayings
that we've talked about
in one of the past videos,
that sometimes we're just taught
what was relevant at the time.
If there was a family
saying, particularly the one
about eating everything
on your plate
because they're
starving children
somewhere in the
world going without,
teaches us sometimes to
override our natural satiation
points of when we want
to stop eating in order
to not feel bad or guilty.
If any of those words have
more resonance for you,
they're the ones to stick
with in your tapping.
We absolutely
recommend that if you
were to tap on
any food cravings,
this must be included in it.
What we're noticing is
at a generational level,
this is not shifting.
The message about food wastage
is actually continuing through,
when maybe it's not relevant.
I can promise you what happens,
when there's no desire for food
anymore, you don't
tend to buy it.
So the food wastage
issue actually
doesn't become your reality
because you don't end up
buying the food when there's
no desire for you to have
to waste it.
So it's just in the first
stage that you really
do need to address it in
order for it to become
a non-issue because you will
find, within time, that when
you do your groceries, you
only buy what you need.
And obviously, your food choices
may change as part of that.
So enjoy tapping on
the food cravings.
There's plenty out there that
we could all do at any point.
And don't forget the
food wastage angle.
[MUSIC PLAYING]